---
title: "Vánočka"
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
header:
  overlay_image: /assets/images/vanocka.jpg
  show_overlay_excerpt: false
categories:
  - sweets
tags:
  - medium
  - duration-medium
author:
  name: "Till"
  avatar: "/assets/images/bio-photo.jpg"
  bio: "Passion for data and food" # Note: Markdown is allowed
  location: "Germany"
  links:
    - label: "Twitter"
      icon: "fab fa-fw fa-twitter-square"
      url: "https://twitter.com/oarsi"
---

A Czech Christmas Braid.

## Ingredients
* 30 g yeast
* 80 g sugar
* 500 g flour 550
* 100 g butter, melted and lukewarm
* 200 ml lukewarm milk
* 2 egg yolks
* 1 egg white
* pinch of salt
* 1 vanilla sugar
* ½ tsp dried lemon peel
* ½-1 tsp. speculaas spice (original nutmeg)
* 1 spoonful of powdered sugar to sprinkle on top
* flaked almonds to sprinkle on top
* Optional: 50 g raisins, can also be preserved in rum

## Preparation
In a small bowl, put the yeast with a teaspoon of sugar. Add a spoonful of flour and half of the lukewarm milk and whisk. Cover the bowl and let the yeast rise for ten minutes. A thick, light, high foam should form. 

Meanwhile, sift the flour into a larger bowl, add the sugar, vanilla sugar, salt, lemon zest and nutmeg.

Make a well in the center of the flour and pour in the yeast. Add the rest of the milk, the two egg yolks and the melted butter. With a wooden spoon, lift the flour into the hollow from the outside and knead the dough. If the dough is too firm for the wooden spoon, continue kneading by hand until all the flour is absorbed. If the dough is too dry, add a little milk (teaspoon wise).

Transfer the dough to the work surface and knead for another ten minutes. If the dough sticks, sprinkle it with a pinch of flour. Finally, the dough should be soft and not stick to the work surface.

Shape the processed dough into a ball, place it in the bowl and dust lightly with flour on all sides. Cover the bowl with a cloth and let the dough rise in a warm place. Now the dough can be safely forgotten for one to one and a half hours. In this time it should be about twice the initial volume. 

Line a baking sheet with baking paper. Transfer the dough from the bowl to the work surface and knead lightly so that the air is pressed out. Optionally, raisins can now be incorporated into the dough.

Divide the dough into eight equal parts, these must now be gradually rolled out into strands about 30 centimeters long. Place the first four strands next to each other so that they point to one. The four strands are now braided. A video on how to do this can be found here: https://youtu.be/TpJiECBCgCc. At the end, press the ends together on both sides and twist under the braid.

When braiding, do not tighten the braid, on the contrary, intentionally leave small gaps between the strands so that the dough has enough room to expand when it rises again. Place the braid in the center of the baking paper and press it a little in the middle along the entire length with the edge of your palm. Whisk the egg white with a fork with two tablespoons of water and brush the first braid.

Now braid the classic braid of three strands and at the end, as before, bring the ends under the braid by pressing and twisting. Place this braid on top of the previous braid, and again press down slightly with the edge of the palm of your hand. Finally, brush again with egg white all around. 

Divide the last piece of dough in half and roll out both pieces a little longer. They should be slightly longer than the previous braid. Twist the strands with each other, but leave the ends open. Place this last braid on top of the previous braids and twist the ends under the bottom braid, each end under one of the corners. Now brush again with egg white and decorate with almond flakes. Let the entire braid rise again for one to one and a half hours. This phase must not be skipped or too short, otherwise the braid will not keep its shape in the oven, as it will rise too quickly in the oven. The top braid could crack and slide down.

Preheat the oven to 180 degrees. Put the braid in the preheated oven. After five minutes, reduce the temperature to 150 degrees and bake for another 40 minutes. If the braid browns too quickly, cover with aluminum foil.

After the braid has cooled, decorate with powdered sugar.

Source: https://www.kucharkaprodceru.cz/jak-se-plete-vanocka-recept/
